Vignette for using Coqui TTS (#24)
jhudsl/text2speech: vignettes/coqui-tts.Rmd

---
title: "Coqui TTS"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Coqui TTS}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)
```

## Introduction

> Coqui TTS is a text-to-speech (TTS) library that enables the conversion of regular text into speech. It provides pre-trained tts and vocoder models as part of its package. To get a sense of the best tts and vocoder models, take a look at this [GitHub Discussion post](https://github.com/coqui-ai/TTS/discussions/1891). In the [Coqui TTS Hugging Face Space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/coqui/CoquiTTS), you have the opportunity to experiment with a few of these models by inputting text and receiving corresponding audio output. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Coqui TTS is a text-to-speech (TTS) library that enables the conversion of regular text into speech and is completely free to use (this is not true of the other text to speech converters used by `text2speech`. 

Coqui TTS provides pre-trained tts and vocoder models as part of its package. To get a sense of the best tts and vocoder models, take a look at this [GitHub Discussion post](https://github.com/coqui-ai/TTS/discussions/1891). In the [Coqui TTS Hugging Face Space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/coqui/CoquiTTS), you have the opportunity to experiment with a few of these models by inputting text and receiving corresponding audio output. 
```

Just want to make it completely clear why one would choose Coqui over the others.

The underlying technology of text-to-speech is highly intricate and will not be the focus of this vignette. However, if you're interested in delving deeper into the subject, here are some recommended talks:

> - [Pushing the frontier of neural text to speech](https://youtu.be/MA8PCvmr8B0), a webinar by Xu Tan at Microsoft Research Asia

Reviewer: Great! I love links to more resources. a) we don't have to go over this material but b) The reader still has access to this knowledge if they want it.

- [Towards End-to-end Speech Synthesis](https://youtu.be/tHAdlv7ThjA), a talk given by Yu Zhang, Research Scientist at Google
- [Text to Speech Deep Dive](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aLBedWj-5CQ), a talk given during the ML for Audio Study Group hosted by Hugging Face.

Coqui TTS includes pre-trained models like [Spectogram models](https://github.com/coqui-ai/TTS#spectrogram-models) (such as Tacotron2 and FastSpeech2), [End-to-End Models](https://github.com/coqui-ai/TTS#end-to-end-models) (including VITS and YourTTS), and [Vocoder models](https://github.com/coqui-ai/TTS#vocoders) (like MelGAN and WaveGRAD).   

> ## Usage

Reviewer: This section should probably come after `# Installation` since someone can't run these thing before they've installed it.

You can utilize its CLI (Command-Line Interface) to generate speech using pre-trained models. This means you can run Coqui TTS commands in the terminal and observe the resulting output.

List pre-trained Coqui TTS models:

```
$ tts --list_models
```

> Run a pre-trained model from the [release models list](https://github.com/coqui-ai/TTS#implemented-models), with its default vocoder:

Reviewer: Probably don't need all this information. We want to tell people how to run `text2speech` with coqui, we don't need to tell them how to run coqui except for how it pertains to running `text2speech`.

```
tts --text "Text for TTS" \
    --model_name "<type>/<language>/<dataset>/<model_name>" \
    --out_path folder/to/save/output.wav
```

text2speech provides several wrapper functions for these system commands using `system()` and `system2()`. 

- `tts --list_models` system command is wrapped in `tts_voices(service = "coqui")`. 
- `tts --text "Text to convert to speech"` system command is wrapped in `tts(service = "coqui")`.

## Installation

To install Coqui TTS, you will need to enter the following command in the terminal:

```
$ pip install TTS
```

<br>

 **Note**: If you are using a Mac with an M1 chip, initial step is to execute the following command in terminal:

```
$ brew install mecab
```

Afterward, you can proceed to install TTS by executing the following command:

```
$ pip install TTS
```

## Authentication

```{r setup}
library(text2speech)
```

To use Coqui TTS, text2speech needs to know the correct path to the Coqui TTS executable. This path can be obtained through two methods: manual and automatic.

### Manual

> You have the option to manually specify the path to the Coqui TTS executable in R. This can be done by setting a global option using the `set_coqui_path()` function:

Reviewer: You may want to tell them how they can find their coqui path. 

Isn't it something like: 

```
which tts
```
There may be other ways. What did you run to find you coqui path?

```{r, eval = FALSE}
tts(text = "Hello world, using a different voice!",
    service = "coqui",
    model_name = "fast_pitch",
    vocoder_name = "ljspeech/hifigan_v2")
```

Another default is that `tts(service = "coqui")` saves the audio output in a temporary folder and its path is shown in the `file` column of the resulting tibble. However, a temporary directory lasts only as long as the current R session, which means that when you restart your R session, that path will not exist! 

A more sustainable workflow would be to save the audio output in a local folder. To save the audio output in a local folder, set the arguments `save_local = TRUE` and `save_local_dest = /full/path/to/local/folder`. Make sure to provide the full path to the local folder.

```{r, eval = FALSE}
tts(text = "Hello world! I am saving the audio output in a local folder",
    service = "coqui",
    save_local = TRUE,
    save_local_dest = "/full/path/to/local/folder")
```

> 

Reviewer: For reproducibility purposes you'll want to spit out a sessionInfo so folks know what software environment was used to make this vignette: 
```suggestion
sessionInfo()
```
